<!--
---
title: Philosophy of Logic and Language
---

Axel and Joe:

Grice, Vagueness, Conditionals, Truth.

-->

<a name="top"></a>

# Philosophy of Logic and Language

Below are readings and essay questions for tutorials in Philosophy of Logic and Language. Many of the readings are online, and easily obtained from the college or other libraries in Oxford, but if you are struggling to get hold of anything, email me, as I have PDF copies of *nearly* everything. 

I have divided the reading for each topic into **CORE READING** and **FURTHER READING**, with more introductory texts marked with a star (*). Focus on the Core Reading suggestions in writing tutorial essays, and use the Further Reading suggestions as starting points for exploring topics in more depth during vacations. You will find more suggestions in the [Faculty Reading List](https://weblearn.ox.ac.uk/access/content/group/91a74877-2e21-45ab-9134-ed8846aec33a/Reading%20Lists/FHS/108%20Philosophy%20of%20Logic%20and%20Language.pdf). 

The default plan is to cover the **TUTORIAL TOPICS**, but I am happy to cover other topics in place of some of these. Options include, but are not limited to, the **OTHER TOPICS**.

**TUTORIAL TOPICS**  

1. [Frege: Sense and Reference](#frege)
2. [Russell: Definite Descriptions](#definite_descriptions)
3. [Kripke: Naming and Necessity](#kripke)
4. [Vagueness](#vagueness)
5. [Implicatures](#implicatures)
6. [Indicative Conditionals](#conditionals)
7. [Indexicals and Demonstratives](#indexicals)
8. [Context-Sensitivity](#semantics_pragmatics)

**OTHER TOPICS**  

- Tarski's Truth Definitions
- The Liar Paradox
- Logical Consequence
- Logical Constants
- Propositional Attitude Reports
- Truth and Meaning
- Metaphor

<!--
**PHILOSOPHY OF LOGIC**  

1. [Tarski's Truth Definitions](#tarski)
2. [The Liar Paradox](#liar)
3. [Absolute Generality](#absolute)
4. [Logical Consequence](#consequence)
5. [Logical Inferentialism](#inferentialism)
6. [Logical Constants](#constants)
7. [Logical Pluralism](#pluralism)
8. [Logic and Reasoning](#reasoning)
-->

<!--
**OTHER TOPICS**  

- [Tarski's Truth Definitions](#tarski)
- [The Liar Paradox](#liar)
- [Logical Consequence](#consequence)
- [Logical Constants](#constants)
- [Propositional Attitude Reports](#propositional_attitudes)
- [Truth and Meaning](#davidson)
- [Metaphor](#metaphor)
-->

<!--
1. [Meaning Scepticism](#scepticism)
2. [Intention and Convention](#grice) 
4. [Knowledge of Language](#knowledge)
5. [Internalism and Externalism](#internalism)
7. [Adverbs](#adverbs)
-->


**ANTHOLOGIES and TEXTBOOKS**  

The following anthologies contain many of the readings listed below, (and much more besides):

- Darragh Byrne and Max Kölbel, eds. (2009) *Arguing about Language* (Routledge). Referred to below as **B&K**.    
- Robert Harnish, ed. (1993) *Basic Topics in the Philosophy of Language* (Harvester Wheatsheaf). Referred to below as **Harnish**.    
- Peter Ludlow, ed. (1997) *Readings in the Philosophy of Language* (MIT Press). Referred to below as **Ludlow**.  
- A\. P. Martinich and David Sosa, eds. (2012) *The Philosophy of Language* (OUP, 6th edition). Referred to below as **Martinich**.  
- Adrian Moore, ed. (1993) *Meaning and Reference* (OUP). Referred to below as **Moore**.  

There is no set textbook, but the following contain good, accessible discussion of many of the topics listed below.

- Gary Kemp (2013) *What is This Thing Called Philosophy of Language?* (Routledge).  
- William Lycan (2008) *Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary Introduction*, 2nd edition (Routledge).  
- Gregory McCulloch (1989) *The Game of the Name* (OUP).  
- Michael Morris (2007) *An Introduction to the Philosophy of Language* (CUP).    
- Mark Sainsbury (2000) *Logical Forms*, 2nd edition (Blackwell).  
- Scott Soames (2010) *Philosophy of Language* (Princeton).  
<!-- 
John Burgess and Alexis Burgess (2011) *Truth* (Princeton).  
Jennifer Fisher (2008) *On the Philosophy of Logic* (Wadsworth).  
Stephen Read (1995) *Thinking About Logic* (OUP).  
-->

The following survey article also provides an excellent overview of many of the themes we'll cover, and will be useful for consolidating what you've learnt after the end of term:

- Jason Stanley (2008) 'Philosophy of Language' in Dermot Moran, ed. *The Routledge Companion to Twentieth Century Philosophy* (Routledge).  

In the vacation beforehand, you may find it helpful to read about an innovation that lies behind much of what we'll be looking at over the course of the term: Frege's treatment of multiple generality. The classic discussion of this is:

- Michael Dummett (1981) *Frege: Philosophy of Language*, 2nd edition (Duckworth), Ch. 2. Reprinted as 'Quantifiers' in R. I. G. Hughes, ed. (1993) *A Philosophical Companion to First-Order Logic* (Hackett).  

For more introductory discussion of this topic, see:

- Gary Kemp (2013) *What is This Thing Called Philosophy of Language?* (Routledge), Ch. 1.  
- Gregory McCulloch (1989) *The Game of the Name* (OUP), Ch. 1.  

  
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

##TUTORIAL TOPICS

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="frege"></a>

## 1. FREGE: SENSE and REFERENCE
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
Do names have sense as well as reference? If so, how is the notion of sense to be understood? If not, how is the apparent meaningfulness of empty names to be explained?  

**CORE READING**  
\*Gideon Makin (2010) '[Frege’s Distinction Between Sense and Reference](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-9991.2009.00277.x)' in *Philosophy Compass*, 5(2), pp. 147-163.  

<!--
\*Sam Cumming (2013) 'Names' in E. Zalta, ed. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*: [https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/names/](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/names/), esp. up to §2.3.  

\*Gary Kemp (2013) *What is This Thing Called Philosophy of Language?* (Routledge), Ch. 1 and 2.   
\*William Lycan (2008) *Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary Introduction* (Routledge, 2nd edition), Ch. 1, and pp. 31-36.  
\*Michael Morris (2007) *An Introduction to the Philosophy of Language* (CUP), Ch. 1 and 2. -->   

Gottlob Frege (1892/1948) '[Sense and Reference](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2181485)' in *Philosophical Review* 57(3), pp. 209-30. Reprinted in **B&K**, **Harnish**, **Ludlow**, **Martinich**, and **Moore**.      
Nathan Salmon (1986) *Frege's Puzzle* (MIT Press). Selections reprinted in **B&K**, **Harnish** and **Martinich**.  
David Braun (1993) '[Empty Names](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2215787)' in *Noûs* 27(4), pp. 449-469.      

**FURTHER READING**  
If you want to pursue the sense/reference issue in more depth, Dummett (1981) is essential reading, as are McDowell (1977) and chapter 1 of Evans (1982). Chapter 10 of Evans (1982) discusses empty names, as does Salmon (1998). Thomasson (2003) focusses on the issue of fictional names. Sainsbury (2005) develops a somewhat Fregean position on empty names &mdash; the first chapter provides an excellent overview of the history of the debate.

Michael Dummett (1981) *Frege: Philosophy of Language*, 2nd edition (Duckworth), Ch. 5.  
John McDowell (1977) '[On the Sense and Reference of a Proper Name](http://doi.org/10.1093/mind/LXXXVI.342.159)' in *Mind* 86(342), pp. 159–185. Reprinted in **Moore**.  
Gareth Evans (1982) *The Varieties of Reference* (OUP).  
Nathan Salmon (1998) '[Nonexistence](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2671935)' in *Noûs* 32(3), pp. 277-319.   
Amie Thomasson (2003) '[Speaking of Fictional Characters](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1746-8361.2003.tb00266.x/abstract)' in *dialectica* 57(2), pp. 205-223. Reprinted in **B&K**.    
Mark Sainsbury (2005) *Reference without Referents* (OUP). Available online [here](http://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:2153/view/10.1093/0199241805.001.0001/acprof-9780199241804).      

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
‘The descriptive theory of names is the only one that can explain our uses of fictional names such as ‘Sherlock Holmes’, and thus must be adopted’. Discuss. (2015)

‘If names are not disguised definite descriptions, we cannot account for themeaning of names such as “Sherlock Holmes”.’ Discuss. (2014)

‘Sherlock Holmes is more famous than any living detective.’ Could this sentence be true? (2013)
How can the claim that Barcan is Marcus be informative? (2013)




<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="definite_descriptions"></a>

## 2. RUSSELL: DEFINITE DESCRIPTIONS
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
Are definite descriptions referring expressions, quantifier expressions, or something else?  

**CORE READING**  
\*Mark Sainsbury (1995) 'Philosophical Logic' in A. C. Grayling, ed. *Philosophy: A Guide Through the Subject* (OUP), pp. 77-86.  

<!--
\*Gary Kemp (2013) *What is This Thing Called Philosophy of Language?* (Routledge), Ch. 3 and 6.  
\*William Lycan (2008) *Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary Introduction* (Routledge, 2nd edition), Ch. 2.  
\*Michael Morris (2007) *An Introduction to the Philosophy of Language* (CUP), Ch. 3.    -->

Bertrand Russell (1919) *Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy*, Ch. XVI, 'Descriptions'. Reprinted in **B&K**, **Ludlow**, **Martinich**, and **Moore**.  
P\. F. Strawson (1950) '[On Referring](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2251176)' in *Mind* 59(235), pp. 320-344. Reprinted in **B&K**, **Ludlow**, **Martinich**, and **Moore**.  
Keith Donnellan (1966) '[Reference and Definite Descriptions](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2183143)' in *Philosophical Review* 75(3), pp. 281-304. Reprinted in **Harnish**, **Ludlow** and **Martinich**.    

**FURTHER READING**  
Kripke (1977) is a must-read, defending a broadly Russellian position. Neale (1990) is an influential exposition and defence of Kripke's position. Strawson's approach has seen a recent revival, especially among linguists &mdash; von Fintel (2004) is a prominent example of this trend. The topic is a key battleground in debates over the semantics/pragmatics distinction; Recanati (1993) and Stanley and Szabó (2000) are two key contributions. 

Saul Kripke (1977) '[Speaker's Reference and Semantic Reference](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4975.1977.tb00045.x)' in *Midwest Studies in Philosophy* 2(1), pp. 255-276. Reprinted in **Ludlow** and **Martinich**.     
Stephen Neale (1990) *Descriptions* (MIT Press), especially Ch. 3, which is reprinted in **Ludlow**. Available online [here](http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=1678&site=ehost-live).    
Kai von Fintel (2004) 'Would You Believe It? The King of France is Back! (Presuppositions and Truth-Value Intuitions)' in Marga Reimer & Anne Bezuidenhout, eds. *Descriptions and Beyond* (OUP).  
Francois Recanati (1993) *Direct Reference* (Blackwell), Ch. 15.    
Jason Stanley and Zoltan Szabó (2000) '[On Quantifier Domain Restriction](http://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0017.00130)' in *Mind & Language* 15(2-3), pp. 219–261.  


**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
What, if anything, is the meaning of the word ‘the’? (2016)

Do sentences such as 'The present King of France is bald' cast doubt on the principle that every well-formed sentence is either true or false? (2015)

Suppose that Jane is the only person in the world who plays professional football and is from Greenland. What, if anything, is the difference between saying ‘Jane lives in the UK’ and ‘The professional football player from Greenland lives in the UK’? (2014)

Can advocates of Russell’s theory of definite descriptions adequately explain uses of ‘incomplete’ descriptions which are satisfied by many objects? (2013)




<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="kripke"></a>

## 3. KRIPKE: NAMING and NECESSITY
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What are Kripke's arguments against the descriptive theories of meaning and reference? Are they successful? What is the causal theory of reference? Is it defensible?

**CORE READING**  
\*John P. Burgess (2012) *Kripke* (Acumen), Ch. 1. Available online [here](https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:4099/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=1166796).    

<!--
\*Gregory McCulloch (1989) *The Game of the Name* (OUP), Ch. 4 and 8.  

\*Gary Kemp (2013) *What is This Thing Called Philosophy of Language?* (Routledge), Ch. 4.   
\*William Lycan (2008) *Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary Introduction* (Routledge, 2nd edition), Ch. 3 and 4.  
\*Michael Morris (2007) *An Introduction to the Philosophy of Language* (CUP), Ch. 4. 

\*Sam Cumming (2013) 'Names' in E. Zalta, ed. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*: [https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/names/](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/names/), esp. §2.4 to §2.6.  

\*John P. Burgess (2012) *Kripke* (Acumen), Ch. 1.  

-->   

Saul Kripke (1980) *Naming and Necessity* (Blackwell), esp. Lecture II and Preface. Extracts reprinted in **B&K**, **Harnish**, **Ludlow**, and **Martinich**.      
Jason Stanley (1997) '[Names and Rigid Designation](http://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:2212/subscriber/uid=959/tocnode?id=g9780631213260_chunk_g978063121326024)' in B. Hale and C. Wright, eds. *A Companion to Philosophy of Language* (Blackwell), pp. 555-85.    
Gareth Evans (1973) '[The Causal Theory of Names](http://www.jstor.org/stable/4106912)' in *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society*, Supp. Vol. 47, pp. 187-208. Reprinted in **Ludlow**, **Martinich**, and **Moore**.     
 
**FURTHER READING**  
Jackson (1998) responds to Kripke's modal argument by arguing that names are abbreviations of so-called actualised descriptions. Jeshion (2002) is a response to Kripke's epistemological argument. Soames (2002) and Noonan (2013) both discuss a wide range of different responses to Kripke &mdash; Soames sides with Kripke, and Noonan against. Either would be an excellent place to start in pursuing this topic in more depth. Burgess (2014) critically discusses Evans' challenge to the causal theory of reference.  

Frank Jackson (1998) '[Reference and Description Revisited](http://doi.org/10.1111/0029-4624.32.s12.9)' in *Philosophical Perspectives* 12, pp. 201–218.  
Robin Jeshion (2002) '[The Epistemological Argument Against Descriptivism](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1933-1592.2002.tb00004.x)' in *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research* 64(2), pp. 325-345.  
Scott Soames (2002) *Beyond Necessity* (OUP), esp. Ch. 2. Available online [here](https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=3052111).  
Harold Noonan (2013) *Routledge Guidebook to Kripke and Naming and Necessity* (Routledge), Ch. 3. Available online [here](https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:4099/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=1687343).  
John P. Burgess (2014) '[Madagascar Revisited](http://analysis.oxfordjournals.org/content/74/2/195.abstract)' in *Analysis* 74(2), pp. 195-201.    

<!-- Robert Stalnaker (1997) 'Reference and Necessity' in B. Hale and C. Wright, eds. *A Companion to Philosophy of Language* (Blackwell), pp. 534-554. 

Gregory McCulloch (1989) *The Game of the Name* (OUP), esp. Ch. 4 and 8.   

Michael Dummett (1973/1981) *Frege: Philosophy of Language* (Duckworth) Ch. 5, Appendix.  

Michael Dummett (1981) *The Interpretation of Frege's Philosophy* (Duckworth), Appendix on Kripke.  

David Sosa (2008) '[Rigidity](http://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199552238.003.0020
)' in E. Lepore and B. C. Smith, eds. *The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Language* (OUP).  



-->

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
A mechanic points at the bonnet of a car, without having seen (or otherwise sensed) the engine, and says ‘I need to inspect that engine’. Does this pose a problem for the causal theory of reference? (2016)

Does ‘Socrates’ mean the same as ‘the actual F’, for some expression ‘F’? (2016)

Suppose that twins Sarah and Lisa are accidentally swapped as babies after their parents have named them both. Unbeknowst to anyone, the child originally named ‘Sarah’ grows up being called ‘Lisa’ and the child originally named ‘Lisa’ grows up being called ‘Sarah’. Must the causal theory of reference predict that ‘Sarah’ refers to the child everyone calls ‘Lisa’ and vice versa? (2015)

Do proper names and definite descriptions ever mean the same thing? (2012)



<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="vagueness"></a>

## 4. VAGUENESS
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What is the sorites paradox? Does it show that we must abandon classical logic?

**CORE READING**  
\*Mark Sainsbury (2009) *Paradoxes*, 3rd edition (CUP), Ch. 3.  

Tim Williamson (1994) *Vagueness* (Routledge), Ch. 7. Reprinted in **B&K**, and available online [here](https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:4099/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=165113).     
Dorothy Edgington (1996) '[Vagueness By Degrees](http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=1461&site=ehost-live&ebv=EB&ppid=pp_294)' in Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith, eds. *Vagueness: A Reader* (MIT Press).    
Rosanna Keefe (2008) '[Vagueness: Supervaluationism](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-9991.2008.00124.x)' in *Philosophy Compass* 3(2), pp. 315-324.       

**FURTHER READING**  
Evans (1978) is a short (1 page!) article arguing against the possibility of vague objects. Sainsbury (1996) is an influential discussion of how vagueness should be characterised. Graff-Fara (2000) defends a contextualist view. Kearns and Magidor (2008) criticize Williamson's epistemicism. Eklund (2011) is a useful survey of recent debates.

Gareth Evans (1978) '[Can There Be Vague Objects?](https://doi.org/10.1093/analys/38.4.208)' in *Analysis* 38(4), p. 208.       
Mark Sainsbury (1996) '[Concepts Without Boundaries](http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=1461&site=ehost-live&ebv=EB&ppid=pp_251)' in Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith, eds. (1996) *Vagueness: A Reader* (MIT Press).  
Delia Graff-Fara (2000) '[Shifting Sands: An Interest-Relative Theory of Vagueness](http://www.princeton.edu/~dfara/papers/fara-shifting.pdf)' in *Philosophical Topics*, 28(1), pp. 45-81. Reprinted in **B&K** and **Martinich**.   
Stephen Kearns and Ofra Magidor (2008) '[Epistemicism About Vagueness and Meta-Linguistic Safety](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1520-8583.2008.00149.x/abstract)' in *Philosophical Perspectives* 22(1), pp. 277-304.  
Matti Eklund (2011) '[Recent Work on Vagueness](http://analysis.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2011/03/14/analys.anr034.extract)' in *Analysis* 71(2), pp. 352-363.  

<!-- Kearns and Magidor - critical of Williamson
Wright 'On Being in a Quandary' -->

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
‘Even if Tim is a borderline case of thinness, the sentence “Tim is thin or Tim is not thin” is manifestly true.’ Discuss. (2016)

Why can’t we know what height exactly is such that anyone below that height counts as not tall and anyone above it counts as tall? (2015)

Critically discuss two (or more) solutions to the sorites paradox. (2014)

‘The friend of metaphysical vagueness believes that, for some object and some property, there can be no determinate fact of the matter whether that object exemplifies that property.... According to the epistemic account, vagueness is explained completely by and is nothing over and above our not knowing some relevant fact or facts.... [L]inguistic vagueness is not a third variety of vagueness. Either it is a species of metaphysical vagueness or a kind of ignorance.’ (MERRICKS) Discuss. (2013)





<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="implicatures"></a>

## 5. IMPLICATURES
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
How, if at all, should we distinguish between what a speaker *says* in uttering a sentence and the *conversational implicatures* of her utterance? Is there any need for a further category of *conventional* implicature?  

**CORE READING**  
\*Yan Huang (2014) *Pragmatics*, 2nd edition (OUP), Ch. 2 and 7.    

<!--
\*Larry Horn (2004) 'Implicature' in Laurence Horn and Gregory Ward, eds. *The Handbook of Pragmatics* (Blackwell).  
Michael Blome-Tillman (2013)  
Wayne Davis SEP -->

Paul Grice (1989) *Studies in the Way of Words* (Harvard), Part 1, esp. Ch. 2. Key selections are reprinted in **B&K**, **Harnish**, and **Martinich**.   
Kent Bach (1999) '[The Myth of Conventional Implicature](http://link.springer.com/10.1023/A:1005466020243)' in *Linguistics and Philosophy* 22(4), pp. 327-366. Reprinted in **Martinich**.  
Deirdre Wilson and Dan Sperber (2004) '[Relevance Theory](http://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:2212/subscriber/uid=959/tocnode?id=g9780631225485_chunk_g978063122548529)' in Laurence Horn and Gregory Ward, eds. *The Handbook of Pragmatics* (Blackwell).  

**FURTHER READING**  
Conventional implicatures have long been viewed with suspicion. Karttunen and Peters (1979) argued that they are simply presuppositions, and Carston (2002) (among other things) presents a relevance-theoretic case against them. But Christopher Potts has recently argued for the need for a separate category of conventional implicatures. See his (2007), which condenses themes from his earlier book. Horn (2012) is an accessible survey piece, written by a leading neo-Gricean. Lepore and Stone (2015) argue for the bold claim that "we have no use for a category of conversational implicatures, as traditionally and currently understood" (p. 6).

Lauri Karttunen and Stanley Peters (1979) 'Conventional Implicature' in P. Cole, ed. *Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 11: Presupposition* (Academic Press). <!--on conventional implicature and presupposition-->  
Robyn Carston (2002) '[Linguistic Meaning, Communicated Meaning and Cognitive Pragmatics](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1468-0017.00192/abstract)' in *Mind \& Language*, 17(1&2), pp. 127-148. Reprinted in **B&K**.    
Christopher Potts (2007) '[Conventional Implicatures](http://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:2067/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199247455.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199247455-e-16)' in Gillian Ramchand and Charles Reiss, ed. *The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Interfaces* (OUP).    
Larry Horn (2012) 'Implicature' in Delia Graff-Fara and Gillian Russell, eds. *Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Language* (Routledge).  
Ernie Lepore and Matthew Stone (2015) *Imagination and Convention* (OUP), esp. Part II. Available online [here](http://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:2153/view/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198717188.001.0001/acprof-9780198717188).    



<!-- 

Travis (1991) and Neale (1992) are two contrasting surveys of Grice's work, with Travis critical and Neale sympathetic.

Jerrold Sadock (1978) 'On Testing for Conversational Implicature' in P. Cole, ed. *Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 9: Pragmatics* (Academic Press).     

Charles Travis (1991) '[Critical Notice: Annals of Analysis](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2254869)' in *Mind* 100(398), pp. 237-264.  
Stephen Neale (1992) '[Paul Grice and the Philosophy of Language](http://www.jstor.org/stable/25001485)' in *Linguistics and Philosophy* 15(5), pp. 509–559.  


Chapman (2005), Ch. 9. &mdash; on the reception of Grice's ideas among linguists.-->    

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
‘We do not need a separate category of conventional implicature. All alleged examples can be analysed as presuppositions.’ Discuss. (2016)  

Does Grice's criterion of cancellability provide a robust distinction between conversational and conventional implicatures? Is there any such distinction? (2015)

How, if it all, do the words ‘and’ and ‘but’ differ in meaning? (2014)

Suppose uttering a sentence S seems to imply that Q. How can we tell whether the implication is a semantic entailment or a conversational implicature? (2014)

<!--
Can a distinction be drawn between what is said and what is conversationally implicated by a linguistic utterance? If so, how? If not, why not?

Is presupposition a semantic or pragmatic phenomenon?

Is there a principled difference between semantic entailment and conversational implicature?

How, if at all, can conversational implicatures be distinguished from literalcontent?Are there any reasons to believe in conventional implicatures?
-->

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="conditionals"></a>

## 6. INDICATIVE CONDITIONALS
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
Do indicative conditionals have truth conditions? If so, are they truth-functional? 

**CORE READING**  
\*Mark Sainsbury (2001) *Logical Forms*, 2nd edition (Blackwell), Ch. 3.   

Frank Jackson (1979) '[On Assertion and Indicative Conditionals](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2184845)' in *The Philosophical Review* 88(4), pp. 565–589.  
Robert Stalnaker (1975) 'Indicative Conditionals' in *Philosophia* 5, pp. 269-286. Reprinted in his (1999) *Context and Content* (OUP), and available online [here](https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/reader.action?ppg=74&docID=3052775&tm=1491680806486).    
Dorothy Edgington (2001/14) 'Indicative Conditionals' in E. Zalta, ed. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*: [https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/conditionals/](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/conditionals/).   

Jackson (1979) and Stalnaker (1975) are both reprinted in Frank Jackson, ed. (1991) *Conditionals* (OUP), which contains many other classic readings on this topic.  

**FURTHER READING**  
In pursuing this topic in any depth, Kratzer (1986) is essential, arguing that "if" is not a two-place connective, but rather a device for restricting the domains of certain operators. Bennett (2001) is an even-minded book-length discussion of all the issues. Block (2008) responds on Stalnaker's behalf to Edgington's objections against his view. Douven (2011) and Gillies (2017) are introductory pieces &mdash; the latter discussing counterfactual as well as indicative conditionals.  

Angelika Kratzer (1986) 'Conditionals' in *Chicago Linguistics Society* 22, pp. 1–15. Reprinted in her (2014) *Modals and Conditionals* (OUP), and available online [here](http://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:2153/view/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199234684.001.0001/acprof-9780199234684-chapter-4).    
Jonathan Bennett (2003) *A Philosophical Guide to Conditionals* (OUP). Available online [here](http://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:2153/view/10.1093/0199258872.001.0001/acprof-9780199258871).     
Eliza Block (2008) '[Indicative Conditionals in Context](http://doi.org/10.1093/mind/fzn051)' in *Mind* 117(468), pp. 783-794.   
Igor Douven (2011) 'Indicative Conditionals' in Leon Horsten and Richard Pettigrew, eds. *The Continuum Companion to Philosophical Logic* (Continuum).  
Anthony Gillies (2017) 'Conditionals' in Bob Hale, Crispin Wright, and Alexander Miller, eds. *A Companion to the Philosophy of Language*, 2nd edition (Blackwell).  


**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Does material implication provide a good analysis of indicative conditionals? (2016)

‘When A is true and B is false, “If A then B” is definitely false. Also, from “not-A or B” we can infer “If A then B”, which shows that whenever A is false or B is true, “If A then B” is true. This proves that the indicative conditional must be a truth- functional connective.’ Is that so? (2015)

Do conditionals have truth-conditions? (2014)

‘If I drop this, it will fall.’ Suppose that I don’t drop the object in question. Is this sufficient to make my claim true? (2013)

<!--
Do indicative conditionals have truth-conditions?

Does the sentence ‘If Jill isn’t at home, then she is at the pub’ have the same truth- conditions as ‘Jill is either at home or at the pub’?-->


<!--
Stalnaker semantics: 
(1) Doesn't validate IE, i.e.:

'If A then, if B, C' not equivalent to 'If A and B, C'

McGee offers a modification that does validate IE, but it's not intuitive.

(2) Entails CONDITIONAL NON CONTRADICTION, i.e.:

Not both 'If A then B' and 'If A then not-B'

This prompts SLY PETE problem: Stalnaker conditionals have to be extremely context sensitive.
-->

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="indexicals"></a>

## 7. INDEXICALS and DEMONSTRATIVES
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What is the relationship between the meaning of a demonstrative, like 'that', and what it refers to on an occasion of use? Is there any interesting distinction between demonstratives and indexicals, like 'I'? 

<!-- On Tuesday, A says 'Today is Tuesday'; the next day, A says 'Yesterday was Tuesday'. In what sense, if any, do A's utterances have the same meaning, and in what sense, if any, do they have a different meaning? 

What problems do answer-machine and other sorts of recorded messages pose for Kaplan's theory of indexicals and demonstratives? How are they best solved? 

What is the relationship between the meaning of an indexical, such as 'I', and what it refers to on an occasion of use? Is there any interesting distinction between indexicals and demonstratives, such as 'that'?
-->  

**CORE READING**  
\*Allyson Mount (2012) 'Indexicals' in Delia Graff Fara and Gillian Russell, eds. *The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Language* (Routledge).  

David Kaplan (1989) 'Demonstratives' in Joseph Almog, John Perry, and Howard Wettstein, eds. *Themes from Kaplan* (OUP). Relevant selections are reprinted in **Harnish** and **Martinich**.      
Kent Bach (1992) '[Intentions and Demonstrations](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3328374)' in *Analysis* 52(3), pp. 140–146.  
Stefano Predelli (1998) '["I Am Not Here Right Now"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3328480)' in *Analysis* 58(2), pp. 107–115.   

<!-- David Kaplan (1990) 'Thoughts on Demonstratives' in Palle Yourgrau, ed. *Demonstratives* (OUP). -->  

<!--

Komarine Romdenh-Romluc (2002) '[Now the French are invading England!](http://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8284.00326)' in *Analysis* 62(273), pp. 34–41. 

Eros Corazza, William Fish, and Jonathan Gorvett (2002) '[Who Is I?](http://doi.org/10.1023/A:1013111419036)' in *Philosophical Studies* 107(1), pp. 1–21. 

Allyson Mount (2008) 'The Impurity of "Pure" Indexicals' in *Philosophical Studies* 138(2), pp. 193–209. -->


**FURTHER READING**  
Perry (1977) argues that indexicals present a special problem for Frege's doctrine of sense. Evans (1981) replies. Both are reprinted in Palle Yourgrau, ed. (1990) *Demonstratives* (OUP). Lewis (1980) argues that, contra Kaplan, the content of a sentence cannot be identified with what it is used to say. Braun (1995) criticises Kaplan's account of character. Cohen and Michaelson (2013) is an accessible survey of recent debate over the answer-machine paradox.

John Perry (1977) '[Frege on Demonstratives](http://doi.org/10.2307/2184564)' in *The Philosophical Review* 86(4), 474-497.   
David Lewis (1980) '[Index, Context, and Content](https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:4563/10.1017/CBO9780511625237.004)' in his (1998) *Papers in Philosophical Logic* (CUP).     
Gareth Evans (1981) 'Understanding Demonstratives' in his (1985) *Collected Papers* (OUP).     
David Braun (1995) '[What is Character?](http://doi.org/10.1007/BF01344202)' in *Journal of Philosophical Logic* 24(3), pp. 227–240.  
Jonathan Cohen and Eliot Michaelson (2013) '[Indexicality and the Answering Machine Paradox](http://doi.org/10.1111/phc3.12039)' in *Philosophy Compass* 8(6), pp. 580–592.   




<!-- Una Stojnic  
David Braun (2015) 'Indexicals' https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/indexicals/

Brian Rabern   
Robert Stalnaker (2014) *Context* (OUP), Ch. 1.  
John Perry (2017) 'The Semantics and Pragmatics of Indexicals' in Hale, Wright, and Miller, eds. 


-->

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Is there any interesting distinction between indexicals and demonstratives? (2014)  

You phone your friend, only to get the voicemail: ‘I am not here now’. Could this message be true? (2013)

Do speaker intentions fix the semantic value of demonstrative expressions? (2012)

‘It is now exactly 3 p.m. Therefore, it is now exactly 3 p.m.’ Is this argument valid? (2011)  

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="semantics_pragmatics"></a>

## 8. CONTEXT-SENSITIVITY
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What problems, if any, does context-sensitivity pose for the idea that the truth-conditions of sentences are determined by the meanings of their parts and the ways that they are put together? What implications does your answer have for the distinction between semantics and pragmatics?  

**CORE READING**   
\*Emma Borg (2009) 'Meaning and Context: A Survey of a Contemporary Debate' in Daniel Whiting, ed. *The Later Wittgenstein on Language* (Palgrave Macmillan).  

Charles Travis (1997) '[Pragmatics](http://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk:2212/subscriber/uid=959/tocnode?id=g9780631213260_chunk_g97806312132606)' in B. Hale and C. Wright, eds. *A Companion to Philosophy of Language* (Blackwell), pp. 89-107.  
Zoltán Gendler Szabó (2001) 'Adjectives in Context' in Istvan Kenesei and Robert Harnish, eds. *Perspectives on Semantics, Pragmatics, and Discourse: a Festschrift for Ferenc Kiefer* (John Benjamins Publishing Company). Reprinted in **B&K**.     
Herman Cappelen and Ernie Lepore (2003) '[Context Shifting Arguments](http://www3.interscience.wiley.com.libproxy.ucl.ac.uk/cgi-bin/fulltext/118900285/PDFSTART)' in *Philosophical Perspectives* 17, pp. 25–50.  

<!-- \*Kent Bach (2012) 'Context-Sensitivity' in Manuel Garcia-Carpintero and Max Kolbel, eds. *The Bloomsbury Companion to the Philosophy of Language* (Bloomsbury). -->   


**FURTHER READING**  
Sainsbury (2001) is an underappreciated gem, demonstrating the range of options available to formal semanticists aiming to accommodate Travis's examples. The remaining papers all concede that truth-conditions are radically context-sensitive, though all except one argue that this can be accommodated within the framework of truth-conditional semantics that we've been working with over the past few weeks. The exception is Carston (2008), which offers a Relevance Theoretic perspective.  

Timothy Williamson (1999) 'Indefinite Extensibility' in Johannes Brandl and Peter Sullivan, eds. *New Essays on the Philosophy of Michael Dummett* (Rodopi).    
Mark Sainsbury (2001) '[Two Ways to Smoke a Cigarette](http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/118996353/)' in *Ratio (New Series)* 14(4), pp. 386-406. Reprinted in his (2002) *Departing from Frege* (Routledge).        
John Macfarlane (2007) '[Semantic Minimalism and Nonindexical Contextualism](https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/reader.action?ppg=251&docID=415199&tm=1491681490024)' in Gerhard Preyer and Georg Peter, eds. *Context-Sensitivity and Semantic Minimalism* (OUP).  
Robyn Carston (2008) '[Linguistic Communication and the Semantics/Pragmatics Distinction](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-007-9191-8)' in *Synthese* 165(3), pp. 321–345.  
Daniel Rothschild and Gabriel Segal (2009) '[Indexical Predicates](http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/122577536/)' in *Mind & Language* 24(4), pp. 467-493.  

<!-- 
\*Francois Recanati (2005) 'Literalism and Contextualism: Some Varieties' in Gerhard Preyer and Georg Peter, eds. *Contextualism in Philosophy* (OUP).
-->


**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Is the word ‘penguin’ context-sensitive? (2016)

What role does context sensitivity play in accounting for the meanings of English words? (2015)

Explain and assess the thesis that meaning is given by truth-conditions. (2013)

What is the difference between semantics and pragmatics? (2012)









<!--



<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
# PHILOSOPHY OF LOGIC

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="tarski"></a>

## 1. TARSKI'S TRUTH DEFINITIONS
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
Does Tarski define the concept of truth? If not, what does he achieve with his definitions?

**CORE READING**  
\*Mario Gómez Torrente (2006/15) 'Tarski' in E. Zalta, ed. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*: [https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/tarski/](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/tarski/)

<!-- \*Alexis Burgess and John P. Burgess (2011) *Truth* (Princeton), Ch. 2.  
\*Wilfrid Hodges (2001/14) 'Tarski's Truth Definitions' in E. Zalta, ed. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*: [https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/tarski-truth/](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/tarski-truth/) --> 

<!-- 
Alfred Tarski (1949) '[The Semantic Conception of Truth](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2102968)' in *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research* 4(3), pp. 341-76.  
John Etchemendy (1988) '[Tarski on Truth and Logical Consequence](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2274427)' in *Journal of Symbolic Logic* 53(1), pp. 53-79, §1 only.  
Wolfgang Künne (2004) *Conceptions of Truth* (OUP), §4.1.  

**FURTHER READING**  
Kirkham (1992) is an accessible overview of various issues related to this week's topic. Field (1972) influentially argues that Tarski's theory aims (but fails) to provide a definition of truth that would acceptable to physicalists. Sher (1999) discusses this and other challenges. Heck (1997) discusses the connection between Tarskian definitions of truth taken as, roughly, theories specifying the meanings of the sentences of the object-language and as theories of what 'true' means in the metalanguage. 

Hartry Field (1972) '[Tarski’s Theory of Truth](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2024879)' in *Journal of Philosophy*, 69(13), pp. 347-375.  
Richard Heck, Jr. (1997) '[Tarski, Truth, and Semantics](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2998511)' *The Philosophical Review* 106(4), 533-554.  
Richard Kirkham (1992) *Theories of Truth* (MIT Press), Ch. 5 and 6.  
Gila Sher (1999) '[What is Tarski’s Theory of Truth?](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023%2FA%3A1006246322119)' in *Topoi* 18(2), pp. 149-166.  
Scott Soames (1999) *Understanding Truth* (OUP), Ch. 3 and 4.  

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Does Tarski's hierarchy of languages help us consistently assign a truth value to the English sentence 'This sentence is not true'?  

Is Tarski's theory of truth a correspondence theory of truth?  

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="liar"></a>

## 2. THE LIAR PARADOX
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What is the best response to the Liar Paradox? Does it require abandoning classical logic?

**CORE READING**  
\*Mark Sainsbury (2009) *Paradoxes*, 3rd edition (CUP), Ch. 6 and 7.  

Saul Kripke  
Graham Priest  
Charles Parsons  

**FURTHER READING**  

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
What are the prospects for a contextualist solution to the Liar Paradox?

Does Tarski's hierarchy of languages help us consistently assign a truth value to the English sentence ‘This sentence is not true’?

Is the Liar Paradox ultimately a problem concerning self-reference?

Does the Liar Paradox force us to give up classical logic?


<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="generality"></a>

## 3. ABSOLUTE GENERALITY
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  


**CORE READING**  
\*Agustín Rayo and Gabriel Uzquiano (2006) 'Introduction' to Rayo and Uzquiano, eds. *Absolute Generality* (OUP).  

Michael Dummett (1993) *Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics* (Duckworth), Ch. 15.    
Richard Cartwright (1994) '[Speaking of Everything](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2215917)' in *Noûs* 28(1), pp. 1-20.  
Timothy Williamson (2003) '  


**FURTHER READING**  
Geoffrey Hellman (2006)  

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Should we believe in absolutely unrestricted quantification?Can we make sense of absolutely unrestricted quantification?
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="consequence"></a>

## 4. LOGICAL CONSEQUENCE
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What are the most serious objections to the model-theoretic account of logical consequence? Can they be addressed?  

**CORE READING**  
'Logical Truth' SEP

Alfred Tarski  
John Etchemendy  
Scott Soames  

**FURTHER READING**  
Alexander Paseau  

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
What is the nature of validity?


<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="inferentialism"></a>

## 5. INFERENTIALISM
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  


**CORE READING**  
\*Julien Murzi and Florian Steinberger (2017) 'Inferentialism' in Bob Hale, Crispin Wright, and Alexander Miller, eds. *A Companion to the Philosophy of Language*, 2nd edition (Blackwell).  

Robert Brandom  
Arthur Prior  
Timothy Williamson  

**FURTHER READING**  


**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
What is involved in following a logical rule such as modus ponens?

Can basic logical principles be justified?

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="constants"></a>

## 6. LOGICAL CONSTANTS
[TOP](#top)


**ESSAY QUESTION**  
How, if at all, should the distinction between logical and non-logical expressions be drawn?

**CORE READING**  
Mark Sainsbury

Christopher Peacocke   
Mario Gómez-Torrente  
John MacFarlane  

**FURTHER READING**  
Gila Sher

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
What is logical and constant about logical constants?

In what sense, if any, do the so-called ‘truth-functional’ connectives stand for truth- functions?

What is it to know the meaning of a logical constant?

What is a logical constant?



<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="pluralism"></a>

## 7. LOGICAL PLURALISM
[TOP](#top)


**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What is logical pluralism? Is it true?

**CORE READING**  
Gillian Russell SEP

JC Beall and Greg Restall  
Graham Priest  
Hartry Field  

**FURTHER READING**  

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Do non-classical propositional logics just propose different meanings for the propositional connectives to those meanings that classical propositional logic proposes?  

Is logical pluralism tenable?

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="reasoning"></a>

## 8. LOGIC and REASONING
[TOP](#top)


**ESSAY QUESTION**  
In what sense, if any, are logical principles normative for reasoning?

**CORE READING**  
Florian Steinberger SEP

Gilbert Harman  
John Macfarlane  
Hartry Field  

**FURTHER READING**  

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  



<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

## OTHER TOPICS

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="propositional_attitudes"></a>

## PROPOSITIONAL ATTITUDE REPORTS
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What is the problem of substitution of co-referring terms in belief reports? Is there a treatment of belief reports that is capable of accounting for it?

<!--What problems do propositional attitude ascriptions pose for the principle of compositionality and semantic innocence? How, if at all, can they be solved?-->

<!--Is it possible to give an account of propositional attitude ascriptions that preserves both the principle of compositionality and semantic innocence? If not, how should they be accounted for?  -->

<!--
**CORE READING**  
\*Gary Kemp (2013) *What is This Thing Called Philosophy of Language?* (Routledge), Ch. 7.  
\*Michael Morris (2007) *An Introduction to the Philosophy of Language* (CUP), Ch. 7 and 8.  
\*Thomas McKay and Michael Nelson (2000/2010) 'Propositional Attitude Reports' in E. Zalta, ed. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*: [http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/prop-attitude-reports/](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/prop-attitude-reports/) 

Donald Davidson (1968) '[On Saying That](http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF00568054)' in *Synthese* 19(1/2), pp. 130-46. Reprinted in **Ludlow**, **Martinich**, and **Moore**.       
Saul Kripke (1979) 'A Puzzle About Belief' in Avishai Margalit, ed. *Meaning and Use* (D. Reidel). Reprinted in **Harnish**, **Ludlow**, and **Martinich**.     
Mark Crimmins and John Perry (1989) '[The Prince and the Phone Booth](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2027014?origin=crossref)' in *Journal of Philosophy* 86(12), pp. 685-711. Reprinted in **Ludlow**.      

**FURTHER READING**  

<!--
\*Mark Richard (2006) 'Propositional Attitude Ascriptions' in Michael Devitt and Richard Hanley, eds. *The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Language* (Blackwell).   

Richard, M. (2008). Opacity. In E. Lepore & B. C. Smith (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Language. Oxford University Press. http://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199552238.003.0027

W\. V. O. Quine (1956) '[Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2022451)' in *Journal of Philosophy* 53(5), pp. 177-87. Reprinted in his (1976) *The Ways of Paradox and Other Essays*, revised and enlarged ed. (Harvard UP) and **Martinich**.    

John Perry (1979) '[The Problem of the Essential Indexical](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2214792)' in *Noûs* 13(1), pp. 3-21. Reprinted in his (2000) *The Problem of the Essential Indexical and Other Essays*, expanded ed. (CSLI) and in **Martinich**.     

-->

<!--
Substitution failures seem to occur not just *inside* the scope of attitude verbs, but also outside and even in so-called simple sentences. See Richard (1983) for the first point, and Saul (1997) for the second. Crimmins and Perry (1989) discuss Richard's puzzle, and defend a contextualist solution. Rumfitt (1993) is a refinement and defence of Davidson's paratactic theory.

Mark Richard (1983) '[Direct Reference and Ascriptions of Belief](http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF00249259)' in *Journal of Philosophical Logic* 12(4), pp. 425-52.     

Jennifer Saul (1997) '[Substitution and Simple Sentences](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3328350)' in *Analysis* 57(2), pp. 102-8.   
Ian Rumfitt (1993) '[Context and Content: the Paratactic Theory Revisited and Revised](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2253978)' in *Mind* 102(407), pp. 429-54.  

<!--
David Braun (1998) '[Understanding Belief Reports](http://doi.org/10.2307/2998375)' in *The Philosophical Review* 107(4), pp. 555-95.    


Stephen Schiffer (1987) *Remnants of Meaning* (MIT Press), pp. 126-37. Reprinted in **Ludlow**.     -->

<!--
**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Bilingual Pierre sincerely assents to ‘Londres est jolie’ but sincerely rejects ‘London is pretty’. Does he believe that London is pretty?

‘Lois Lane believes that Superman can fly. Superman is identical to Clark Kent. Therefore, Lois Lane believes that Clark Kent can fly’. Is this a valid argument?

Must an adequate account of the truth-conditions of sentences such as ‘Lois Lane believes that Superman can fly’ cause trouble for the view that each English word is used with the same meaning by all English speakers?

Is the meaning of ‘Cameron knows that Jeffrey Archer was a writer’ determinedby the meanings of its parts and the way they are put together?
What is the logical form of belief reports?
Do belief reports pose a problem for the principle that the meaning of a sentence is a function of the meaning of its constituents?
<!--Does the proper name 'Cicero' have the same semantic role in the sentences 'Cicero is an orator' and 'Alice believes that Cicero is an orator'?
-->




<!--
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="davidson"></a>

## TRUTH and MEANING
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
What problem does Foster raise for Davidson's proposal that a Tarski-style theory of truth can serve as a theory of meaning? How does Foster's problem differ from the so-called extensionality problem? Can either problem be solved?

**CORE READING**  
\*William Lycan (2008) *Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary Introduction* (Routledge, 2nd edition), Ch. 9.  
\*Mark Platts (1997) *Ways of Meaning* 2nd ed. (MIT Press), Ch. I & II.  
\*Gary Kemp (2013) *What is This Thing Called Philosophy of Language?* (Routledge), Ch. 8.  
\*Michael Morris (2007) *An Introduction to the Philosophy of Language* (CUP), Ch. 9.  

Donald Davidson (1965) '[Truth and Meaning](http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.1007/BF00485035)' in *Synthese* 17(1), pp. 304–323. Reprinted in his (2001) *Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation* 2nd ed. (OUP), **Ludlow**, and **Martinich**.    
&mdash; (1973) '[Radical Interpretation](http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1746-8361.1973.tb00623.x)' in *Dialectica* 27(3/4), pp. 313–328. Also in his (2001) *Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation* 2nd ed. (OUP).   
John Foster (1976) 'Meaning and Truth Theory' in Gareth Evans and John McDowell, eds. *Truth and Meaning: Essays in Semantics* (OUP), Ch. 1. Davidson’s reply and the editors’ introduction are useful additional reading.   
David Wiggins (1997) 'Meaning and truth conditions: from Frege's grand design to Davidson's' in Bob Hale and Crispin Wright, eds. *A Companion to the Philosophy of Language* (Blackwell).  


**FURTHER READING**  
Segal (1999) gives a particularly clear account of Davidson's proposal, Foster's problem, and the difference between it and the extensionality problem, before offering his own solution. Higginbotham (1992) offers another solution, which is criticized in Soames (2008). Lepore and Ludwig (2010) respond to Soames.

Gabriel Segal (1999) 'How a Truth Theory can do Duty as a Theory of Meaning' in Urszula Zeglen, ed. *Donald Davidson: Truth, Meaning and Knowledge* (Routledge).  
James Higginbotham (1992) '[Truth and Understanding](http://www.jstor.org/stable/4320269)' in *Philosophical Studies* 65(1/2), pp. 3–16.  
Scott Soames (2008) '[Truth and Meaning: In Perspective](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4975.2008.00162.x)' in *Midwest Studies in Philosophy* 32, pp. 1–19.  
Ernie Lepore and Kirk Ludwig (2010) '[Truth and Meaning Redux](http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11098-010-9536-x)' in *Philosophical Studies* 154(2), pp. 251–77.  

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Under what circumstances, if any, is a theory of truth an adequate theory of meaning?  

Explain and assess the thesis that meaning is given by truth-conditions.  

What problems are posed by non-indicative moods for a truth-conditions theory of meaning? Are they soluble?


## INTERNALISM and EXTERNALISM
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  

**CORE READING**  

**FURTHER READING**  

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
‘We can have no intuitions as to whether the term water has the same “reference” for Oscar and Twin Oscar: that is a matter of decision about the technical term “reference”.’ (CHOMSKY) Does this consideration undermine the force of Putnam’s Twin Earth thought experiment?

‘The Twin Earth thought experiment doesn't establish that meaning isn't in the head. At best it establishes that either meaning isn’t in the head, or meaning doesn’t determine reference.’ Is this correct?

Is there any sense according to which Oscar and Twin-Oscar mean the same thing when they say ‘Water is liquid’?

When you and your counterpart on twin earth use the word ‘water’, you refer to different chemical substances. Is there any good sense in which you use it with the same meaning?

‘Competent speakers know by reflection what their words mean. Certain words have their meaning because of speaker interaction with the environment. Thus, competent speakers can know by reflection about such interaction with the environment.’ Discuss.

Does your twin-earth counterpart use ‘water’ with the same meaning as you?

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="metaphor"></a>

## METAPHOR
[TOP](#top)

**ESSAY QUESTION**  
`Do metaphors have propositional content? If so, does that content form part of a speaker says or part of what she implicates?`

**CORE READING**  
\*William Lycan (2008) *Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary Introduction* (Routledge, 2nd edition), Ch. 14.  
\*Gary Kemp (2013) *What is This Thing Called Philosophy of Language?* (Routledge), Ch. 6.  
\*Marga Reimer and Elisabeth Camp (2008) 'Metaphor' in Ernie Lepore & Barry C. Smith, eds. *The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Language* (OUP).  

Donald Davidson (1978) '[What Metaphors Mean](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1342976)' in *Critical Inquiry* 5(1), pp. 31–47. Reprinted in his (2001) *Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation* 2nd ed. (OUP) and **B&K**.    
Max Black (1979) '[How Metaphors Work: A Reply to Davidson](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1343091)' in *Critical Inquiry* 6(1), pp. 31–47. Reprinted in **B&K**.  
John Searle (1979) 'Metaphor' in his *Expression and Meaning* (CUP).  
Dan Sperber and Deirdre Wilson (1985) '[Loose Talk](http://www.jstor.org/stable/4545042)' in *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society*, 86, pp. 153–171.  

**FURTHER READING**  
Moran (1997) is a useful survey piece, critical of Davidson. Camp (2006) defends the sort of Gricean position offered by Searle. Wearing (2006) defends a relevance theoretic position. Fogelin (2011) defends the figurative simile view discussed by Lycan. 

Richard Moran (1997) 'Metaphor' in Bob Hale and Crispin Wright, eds. *A Companion to the Philosophy of Language* (Blackwell).  
Elisabeth Camp (2006) '[Contextualism, Metaphor, and What is Said](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0017.2006.00279.x)' in *Mind & Language* 21(3), pp. 280–309.   
Catherine Wearing (2006) '[Metaphor and What is Said](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-0017.2006.00280.x/full)' in *Mind & Language* 21(3), pp. 310–332.  
Robert Fogelin (2011) *Figuratively Speaking*, revised edition (OUP).  

<!--
Merrie Bergmann (1982) '[Metaphorical Assertions](http://doi.org/10.2307/2184628)' in *The Philosophical Review*, 91(2), pp. 229-245.  
Elisabeth Camp (2006) '[Contextualism, Metaphor, and What is Said](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0017.2006.00279.x)' in *Mind & Language* 21(3), pp. 280–309.   
Robert Fogelin (2011) *Figuratively Speaking*, revised edition (OUP)
Richard Moran (1997) 'Metaphor' in Bob Hale and Crispin Wright, eds. *A Companion to the Philosophy of Language* (Blackwell).  
Catherine Wearing (2006) '[Metaphor and What is Said](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-0017.2006.00280.x/full)' in *Mind & Language* 21(3), pp. 310–332.-->

<!--
**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Has Cognitive Linguistics advanced our understanding of metaphor?

Is metaphor a semantic or a pragmatic phenomenon?

One can sometimes acceptably respond to a metaphorical utterance of ‘John is a pig!’ by saying ‘That is not true!’ What implications does this have for our theory of metaphor?

Do metaphorical utterances have propositional contents?

Can metaphorical sentences and non-metaphorical ones ever mean the same thing?

Is the sentence ‘John has a heart of gold’ ever true?

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="adverbs"></a>

## ADVERBS
[TOP](#top)

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
‘Caesar mostly avoids the forum.’ Can ‘mostly’ here be adequately analysed by means of Davidson’s theory of adverbs?

‘Since Mary decided to cross the channel by swimming rather than by boat, she ended up crossing the channel slowly. But she swam the channel very quickly’. How can a theory of adverbs accommodate these claims?

On the one hand, from ‘Mary swam quickly’ we can infer ‘Mary swam’. On the other hand, from ‘Mary allegedly tortured turtles’ we cannot infer ‘Mary tortured turtles’. How can our theory of adverbs account for these facts?

What is the logical form of ‘Bolt ran quickly’?

Do the semantics of adverbs have anything to tell us about ontological commitment?

What is the semantic contribution of adverbs?

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
<a name="truth"></a>

## TRUTH
[TOP](#top)

**PAST PAPER QUESTIONS**  
Can we have a correspondence theory of truth without an accompanying metaphysics of facts?Is the view that the meaning of a sentence is that sentence’s truth-conditions consistent with a deflationary theory of truth?

Are the correspondence theory of truth and the deflationary theory of truth really in tension?

What is deflationism about truth? Is it correct?

‘Truth is a device of semantic ascent.’ Discuss.

Can truth be defined?

If ‘It is true that Mary is tall’ has exactly the same truth-conditions as ‘Mary is tall’, what lessons can we draw from this concerning truth?



 






<!-- BYRNE and KOLBEL

Introduction  

Part 1: A Homeric Struggle: Communication and Truth  1. Meaning H. Paul Grice  2. Meaning and Truth Peter Strawson  3. Language and Communication Michael Dummett  

Part 2: Sense and Reference  4. On Sense and Reference Gottlob Frege  5. Frege’s Puzzle Nathan Salmon  

Part 3: Definite Descriptions: Quantifiers or Singular Terms?  6. Descriptions Bertrand Russell  7. On Referring Peter Strawson  8. Mr Strawson on Referring Bertrand Russell  

Part 4: Rigidity vs. Descriptivism  9. Naming and Necessity Saul Kripke  10. Reference and Descriptions Revisited Frank Jackson  

Part 5: Analyticity  11. Two Dogmas of Empiricism W. V. Quine  12. In Defense of a Dogma H. Paul Grice and Peter Strawson  

Part 6: Truth and Meaning  13. Truth and Meaning Donald Davidson  14. Meaning and Truth Theory John Foster  

Part 7: Meaning, Intention and Convention  15. Languages and Language David K. Lewis  16. A Note on 'Languages and Language' John Hawthorne  17. A Chomskian Alternative to Convention-Based Semantics Stephen Laurence  

Part 8: Knowledge of Language  18. Knowledge of Language Noam Chomsky  19. Semantic Theory and Tacit Knowledge Gareth Evans  20. Theories of Meaning and Speakers’ Knowledge Crispin Wright  

Part 9: Meaning, Holism and Inferential Role  21. Why Meaning (Probably) Isn’t Conceptual Role Ernest Lepore and Jerry Fodor  22. Is Compositionality Compatible with Holism? Peter Pagin  

Part 10: Implicature  23. Logic and Conversation H. Paul Grice  24. Linguistic Meaning, Communicated Meaning and Cognitive Pragmatics Robyn Carston  

Part 11: Compositionality and Context  25. Against compositionality: the case of adjectives Ran Lahav  26. Adjectives in context Zoltan Szabo  

Part 12: Rule-following and Normativity  27. Kripke’s Account of the Argument against Private Language Crispin Wright  28. Semantic Normativity Asa Wikforss  

Part 13: Metaphor  29. What Metaphors Mean Donald Davidson  30. How Metaphors Work: a Reply to Donald Davidson Max Black  

Part 14: Vagueness in Language  31. Vagueness, Logic and Ontology Achille Varzi  32. Vagueness and Ignorance Timothy Williamson  33. Shifting sands: an interest-relative theory of vagueness Delia Graff Fara  

Part 15: Fictional Discourse  34. Truth in Fiction David K. Lewis  35. Talk about Fiction Stefano Predelli  36. Speaking of Fictional Characters Amie L. Thomasson-->


<!-- HARNISH

I. MEANING, SPEECH ACTS, AND COMMUNICATION.

Introduction, Kent Bach. 
1. H. P. Grice (1957), Meaning. 
2. J. L. Austin (1962), Locutionary, Illocutionary, Perlocutionary. 
3. P. F. Strawson (1964), Intention and Convention in Speech Acts. 
4. H. P. Grice (1975), Logic and Conversation. 
5. J. R. Searle (1989), How Performatives Work.

II. SENSE AND REFERENCE.

Introduction, Nathan Salmon. 
6. J. S. Mill (1843), Of Names. 
7. G. Frege (1892), On Sense and Reference. 
8. B. Russell (1905), On Denoting. 
9. K. Donnellan (1966), Reference and Definite Descriptions. 
10. S. Kripke (1980), Naming and Necessity. 
11. H. Putnam (1975), The Meaning of "Meaning". 
12. D. Kaplan (1977/89), Demonstratives.

III. OPACITY AND ATTRIBUTIONS OF ATTITUDE.

Introduction, Graeme Forbes. 
13. W. Quine (1960), Referential Opacity. 
14. S. Kripke (1979), A Puzzle about Belief. 
15. T. Burge (1979), Individualism and the Mental. 
16. N. Salmon (1986), Frege's Puzzle.

IV. MEANING AND TRUTH.

Introduction, Scott Soames. 
17. G. Frege (1918), The Thought: A Logical Inquiry. 
18. A. Tarski (1944), The Semantic Conception of Truth and the Foundations of Semantics. 
19. H. Field (1972), Tarski's Theory of Truth. 
20. D. Davidson (1967), Truth and Meaning. 
Afterword: Truth and Paradox, Vann McGee. 
-->

<!-- LUDLOW

Part 1 Language and meaning: 
the thought - a logical inquiry, Gottlob Frege; 
excerpt from "The Blue and Brown Books", Ludwig Wittgenstein; 
translation and meaning, Willard Van Orman Quine; 
Utterer's meaning and intentions, Paul Grice; 
truth and meaning, Donald Davidson; 
what model-theoretic semantics cannot do, Ernest Lepore; 
what is a theory of meaning? Nichael Dummett; 
elucidations of meaning, James Higginbotham; 
knowledge of meaning and theories of truth, Richard K. Larson and Gabriel Segal. 

Part 2 Logical form and grammatical form: 
some remarks on logical form, Ludwig Wittgenstein; 
the logical form of action sentences, Donald Davidson; 
semantic structure and logical form, Gareth Evans; 
deep structure as logical form, Gilbert Harman; 
logical form as a level of linguistic representation, Robert May. 

Part 3 Definite and indefinite descriptions: 
descriptions, Bertrand Russell; 
on referring, Peter F. Strawson; 
reference and definite descriptions, Keith S. Donnellan; 
speaker's reference and semantic reference, Saul A. Kripke; 
context and communication, Stephen Neale; 
referential and quantificational indefinites, Janet Dean Fodor and Ivan A. Sag; 
indefinite descriptions - in defense of Russell, Peter Ludlow and Stephen Neale. 

Part 4 Names: 
on sense and reference, Gottlob Frege; 
proper names, John R. Searle; 
reference and proper names, Tyler Burge; 
lecture II of "Naming and Necessity", Saul A. Kripke; 
the causal theory of names, Gareth Evans. 

Part 5 Demonstratives: 
truth and demonstratives, Scott Weinstein; 
dthat, David Kaplan; 
Frege on demonstratives, John Perry; 
understanding demonstratives, Gareth Evans; 
individuation and the semantics of demonstratives, Martin Davies. 

Part 6 Attitude reports: 
the method of intention, Rudolph Carnap; 
on synonymy and indirect discourse, Israel Scheffler; 
vagaries of reference, Willard Van Orman Quine; 
on saying that, Donald Davidson; 
opacity and scope, Barbara Partee; 
sententialist theories of belief, Stephen Schiffer; 
a puzzle about belief, Saul A. Kripke; 
direct reference, propositional attitude and semantic content, Scott Soames; 
the prince and the phone booth - reporting puzzling beliefs, Mark Crimmins and John Perry; 
interpreted logical form, Richard K. Larson and Peter Ludlow; 
intentional "transitive" verbs and concealed complement clauses, Marcel den Dikken et al.
-->

<!-- MARTINICH

I. NAMES
1. Of Names (1881), John Stuart Mill
2. On Sense and Reference (1892), Gottlob Frege
* 3. Proper Names (1958), John R. Searle
4. From Naming and Necessity (1972), Saul Kripke
5. Meaning and Reference (1973), Hilary Putnam
6. The Causal Theory of Names (1973), Gareth Evans
* 7. From Frege's Puzzle (1986), Nathan Salmon

II. DESCRIPTIONS
8. On Denoting (1905), Bertrand Russell
9. Descriptions (1919), Bertrand Russell
10. On Referring (1950), P. F. Strawson
11. Mr. Strawson on Referring (1957), Bertrand Russell
12. Reference and Definite Descriptions (1966), Keith Donnellan
* 13. Speaker's Reference and Semantic Reference (1977), Saul Kripke

III. ASCRIPTIONS
14. Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes (1956), W. V. Quine
15. Quantifying In (1968), David Kaplan
16. On Saying That (1968), Donald Davidson
* 17. Synonymity (1952), Benson Mates
18. A Puzzle about Belief (1979), Saul Kripke
* 19. The Import of the Puzzle about Belief (1996), David Sosa
* 20. Belief Ascription (1992), Stephen Schiffer

IV. COMMUNICATION
21. Meaning (1957), H. P. Grice
22. Performative Utterances (1961), J. L. Austin
23. The Structure of Illocutionary Acts (1969), John R. Searle
24. Logic and Conversation (1975), H. P. Grice
* 25. Conversational Impliciture (1994), Kent Bach
26. A Nice Derangment of Epitaphs (1985), Donald Davidson

V. TRUTH
27. The Thought: A Logical Inquiry (1918), Gottlob Frege
28. The Semantic Conception of Truth and the Foundations of Semantics (1944), Alfred Tarski
* 29. Tarski's Theory of Truth (1972), Hartry Field
30. Truth and Meaning (1967), Donald Davidson
* 31. What Is a Theory of Meaning? (1975), M. A. E. Dummett

VI. ANALYTICITY
32. Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951), W. V. Quine
* 33. In Defense of a Dogma (1956), H.P. Grice and P.F. Strawson
* 34. "Two Dogmas" Revisited (1976), Hilary Putnam

VII. INDETERMINANCIES
35. Assertion (1978), Robert Stalnaker
36. Demonstratives: An Essay on the Semantics, Logic, Metaphysics, and Epistemology of Demonstratives and Other Indexicals (1977), David Kaplan
37. The Problem of the Essential Indexical (1979), John Perry
38. From On Rules and Private Language (1982), Saul Kripke
* 39. The Rule-Following Considerations (1989), Paul A. Boghossian
* 40. From Blindspots (1988), Roy Sorenson
* 41. Vagueness without Paradox (1994), Diana Raffman
* 42. Shifting Sands: An Interest-Relative Theory of Vagueness (2000), Delia Graff Fara

VIII. LANGUAGE
43. Of Words (1699), John Locke
* 44. From Philosophical Investigations (1953), Ludwig Wittgenstein
* 45. Empiricist Criteria of Cognitive Significance: Problems and Changes (1950), Carl G. Hempel
46. Languages and Language (1975), David Lewis
* 47. Toward a Causal Theory of Linguistic Representation (1977), Dennis W. Stampe
48. Language and Problems of Knowledge (1988), Noam Chomsky -->  

<!-- MOORE

On sense and reference, Gottlob Frege; 
letter to Jourdain, Gottlob Frege; 
descriptions, Bertrand Russell; 
on referring, P.F. Strawson; 
mind and verbal dispositions, W.V. Quine; 
truth and meaning, Donald Davidson; 
on the sense and reference of a proper name, John McDowell; 
what does the appeal to use do for the theory of meaning, Michael Dummett; 
meaning and reference, Hilary Putnam; 
identity and necessity, Saul Kripke; 
Putnam's doctrine of natural kind words and Frege's doctrines of sense, reference and extension - can they cohere?, David Wiggins; 
the causal theory of names, Gareth Evans; 
Frege's distinction between sense and reference, Michael Dummett; 
Wittgenstein on following a rule, John McDowell.
-->
